<|begin_of_text|>
The best thing to do in San Francisco is eat a sandwich and sit in Dolores Park on a sunny day.
<|begin_of_text|><|begin_of_text|>January 2017People who are powerful but uncharismatic will tend to be disliked.
Their power makes them a target for criticism that they don't have
the charisma to disarm. That was Hillary Clinton's problem. It also
tends to be a problem for any CEO who is more of a builder than a
schmoozer. And yet the builder-type CEO is (like Hillary) probably
the best person for the job.I don't think there is any solution to this problem. It's human
nature. The best we can do is to recognize that it's happening, and
to understand that being a magnet for criticism is sometimes a sign
not that someone is the wrong person for a job, but that they're
the right one.November 2021(This essay is derived from a talk at the Cambridge Union.)When I was a kid, I'd have said there wasn't. My father told me so.
Some people like some things, and other people like other things,
and who's to say who's right?It seemed so obvious that there was no such thing as good taste
that it was only through indirect evidence that I realized my father
was wrong. And that's what I'm going to give you here: a proof by
reductio ad absurdum. If we start from the premise that there's no
such thing as good taste, we end up with conclusions that are
obviously false, and therefore the premise must be wrong.We'd better start by saying what good taste is. There's a narrow
sense in which it refers to aesthetic judgements and a broader one
in which it refers to preferences of any kind. The strongest proof
would be to show that taste exists in the narrowest sense, so I'm
going to talk about taste in art. You have better taste than me if
the art you like is better than the art I like.If there's no such thing as good taste, then there's no such thing
as good art. Because if there is such a
thing as good art, it's
easy to tell which of two people has better taste. Show them a lot
of works by artists they've never seen before and ask them to
choose the best, and whoever chooses the better art has better
taste.So if you want to discard the concept of good taste, you also have
to discard the concept of good art. And that means you have to
discard the possibility of people being good at making it. Which
means there's no way for artists to be good at their jobs. And not
just visual artists, but anyone who is in any sense an artist. You
can't have good actors, or novelists, or composers, or dancers
either. You can have popular novelists, but not good ones.We don't realize how far we'd have to go if we discarded the concept
of good taste, because we don't even debate the most obvious cases.
But it doesn't just mean we can't say which of two famous painters
is better. It means we can't say that any painter is better than a
randomly chosen eight year old.That was how I realized my father was wrong. I started studying
painting. And it was just like other kinds of work I'd done: you
could do it well, or badly, and if you tried hard, you could get
better at it. And it was obvious that Leonardo and Bellini were
much better at it than me. That gap between us was not imaginary.
They were so good. And if they could be good, then art could be
good, and there was such a thing as good taste after all.Now that I've explained how to show there is such a thing as